1. Introduction to image processing
Image processing is a method to perform some operations on an image, in order to get an enhanced image or to extract some useful information from it. It is a type of signal processing in which input is an image and output may be image or characteristics/features associated with that image. Nowadays, image processing is among rapidly growing technologies. It forms core research area within engineering and computer science disciplines too.

Image processing basically includes the following three steps:

Importing the image via image acquisition tools;
Analysing and manipulating the image;
Output in which result can be altered image or report that is based on image analysis.
There are two types of methods used for image processing namely, analogue and digital image processing. Analogue image processing can be used for the hard copies like printouts and photographs. Image analysts use various fundamentals of interpretation while using these visual techniques. Digital image processing techniques help in manipulation of the digital images by using computers. The three general phases that all types of data have to undergo while using digital technique are pre-processing, enhancement, and display, information extraction.

In this lecture we will talk about a few fundamental definitions such as image, digital image, and digital image processing. Different sources of digital images will be discussed and examples for each source will be provided. The continuum from image processing to computer vision will be covered in this lecture. Finally we will talk about image acquisition and different types of image sensors.
2. Sampling and quantization
In order to become suitable for digital processing, an image function f(x,y) must be digitized both spatially and in amplitude. Typically, a frame grabber or digitizer is used to sample and quantize the analogue video signal. Hence in order to create an image which is digital, we need to covert continuous data into digital form. There are two steps in which it is done:

Sampling
Quantization
The sampling rate determines the spatial resolution of the digitized image, while the quantization level determines the number of grey levels in the digitized image. A magnitude of the sampled image is expressed as a digital value in image processing. The transition between continuous values of the image function and its digital equivalent is called quantization.

The number of quantization levels should be high enough for human perception of fine shading details in the image. The occurrence of false contours is the main problem in image which has been quantized with insufficient brightness levels. 

In this lecture we will talk about two key stages in digital image processing. Sampling and quantization will be defined properly. Spatial and grey-level resolutions will be introduced and examples will be provided. An introduction on implementing the shown examples in MATLAB will be also given in this lecture.